Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and over the
past few weeks, we’ve had quite a
few heavy topics: Roman tyrants,
hijackings, and American criminals.
So today we’re talking about something
completely different: happiness.
It’s something we all want to be;
it’s something that we all can be,
but what does happiness really mean?
Can it ever be truly measured, and
what, according to the Global Happiness
Report, really makes a person happy?.
OK then, let's talk about happiness.
Dictionaries are sometimes pretty useless.
If you look up “happiness” in a
dictionary, it’ll probably say something
like “the state of being happy”.
So you look up “happy”, and it’ll
say something like “feeling or
showing pleasure or contentment”,
or “a state of well-being”.
And there isn’t much reason to look
up the definition of “happy”, at
least in a monolingual dictionary.
I know what it means, you know what it
means, from an office on the 90th floor
of a skyscraper in Tokyo to a Kalahari
Bushman, we might have different words
for it, but we know what it means.
It, of course, means different things
to different people; different things
make different people happy, there
are different types of happiness,
and something that makes one person
happy might make another person sad.
What is universal is that happiness
is something humans, throughout
history, have always sought.
Happiness as a goal in itself might
be more of a recent ideal, but it
seems reasonable to suppose that even
early hunter-gatherer communities
tens of thousands of years ago would
have pursued activities that would
have brought them happiness, whether
that was sitting around a fire and
eating a roasted rabbit together, or
painting animals on the walls of caves
and telling stories to their children.
One can imagine that a caveman, his belly
full, his partner and children singing
songs around him, his face warmed by the
sun setting in the west, and just about
to retire to his cave for the evening,
might have thought, “life is good”.
Perhaps he would even have declared
something along the lines of “I am happy”.
Fast forward to the modern era, and
we have scientists, statisticians,
economists and even governments trying
to measure happiness, using it as
a yardstick for the well-being of a
country, as an alternative to metrics
like GDP, Gross Domestic Product.
So, can happiness really be measured?
And before we can measure it, we need
to ask: what exactly are we measuring?
Is happiness the fleeting pleasure of
a slice of rich chocolate cake, or a
glass of wine after a long day at work?
Is it the satisfaction we might get
after completing something difficult?
A long run, or having a conversation
in English that you might
have thought you never could?
Is it the longer-term satisfaction
of a life well lived, someone
looking back on their life and
thinking, “I am proud of myself”?
Is it meaning, purpose, joy,
contentment, or all of those things?
Psychologists often distinguish
between two broad types of happiness:
hedonic happiness, which is about
pleasure and the absence of pain, and
something called eudaimonic happiness,
which is about purpose, growth, and
living in line with your values.
This is actually something that goes
all the way back to Aristotle, the
4th-century BC Greek Philosopher
who spent considerable time
addressing the question of happiness.
Now, Aristotle didn’t exactly
split happiness into two categories
the way modern psychologists do.
His focus was on eudaimonia, which is
often translated as “flourishing”, living
a virtuous life in line with your values.
He did talk about hedone, or pleasure,
but he saw it as just one part of a
good life, not equal to eudaimonia.
Modern psychology has borrowed and
adapted these ideas into what we now
call hedonic and eudaimonic happiness.
And then there’s an even more
modern addition: what researchers
call subjective well-being.
That’s a catch-all term that usually
combines three things: how satisfied
you are with your life overall, how much
positive emotion you experience, and how
much negative emotion you experience.
In other words, it’s to do
with how happy you feel.
Because, at the end of the day, that’s
the only thing that matters, your
perception of your own happiness.
The caveman sitting around a fire 50,000
years ago wasn’t thinking, “I wish I
had a flat screen TV”, and there are
plenty of people today who have plenty
of things that theoretically make a
person happy–a nice house, a secure job,
a loving family–yet for whatever reason,
they don’t feel satisfied themselves.
So, even before we attempt to measure
it, defining what we are measuring,
what happiness is, is not exactly easy.
Now, one of the first attempts to
measure happiness came in the late
18th century, with the father of the
Utilitarian movement, Jeremy Bentham.
He tried to mathematically calculate
happiness, and his equation was
based on subtracting painful
activities from pleasurable ones.
It was slightly more complicated
than this, and activities were split
up into seven factors: Intensity,
Duration, Certainty, Proximity,
Fecundity, Purity, and Extent.
Now isn’t the time to go into all
of these, and we do actually have a
standalone episode on Jeremy Bentham
– it’s episode number 116 – but the
point is that it was an early attempt
to account for the fact that pleasure
and pain have different qualities.
In other words, the pleasure you might
get from eating an apple, let’s say, was
worth less than the pain of being locked
up in prison and tortured for 10 years.
And the pleasure of knowing that
you had saved the lives of tens of
thousands of children was worth more
than the pain of stubbing your toe.
So Bentham was one of the first
to dream of quantifying happiness.
But his calculus stayed
mostly theoretical.
After all, if we assume that his
weightings and calculations were
100% correct, which they surely were
not, then the process of calculating
individual happiness would have been
so long and complicated that it would
firstly have been impractical, and
secondly would have taken so long that
its subject would no doubt have become
quite unhappy while it was taking place.
It wasn’t until the 20th century
that psychologists began developing
practical tools – surveys, scales,
and experiments – to try to measure
how happy people really were.
And the most common tool, even today,
is perhaps the simplest: the survey.
You’ve almost certainly seen
questions like these before:
“On a scale of 1 to 10, how satisfied
are you with your life as a whole?”
“Taking all things together, would you
say you are very happy, quite happy,
not very happy, or not at all happy?”
These so-called life satisfaction
questions are the backbone
of most happiness research.
They are simple, easy to administer across
large populations, and when you add them
up, you can start to compare one country
to another, or track changes over time.
Now, surveys like this are neat,
but they have a big limitation:
they rely on people remembering
and summarising their happiness.
Psychologists know that memory
is unreliable: we tend to
overemphasise the highs and lows,
and undercount the ordinary moments.
This is sometimes referred to as the
“peak–end rule”: when people recall
an experience, they mostly remember
the most intense moment, the “peak”,
and how it concluded, the “end”.
You sort of forget the bits in the middle.
So if you really want to capture
happiness more accurately, you need to
measure it in the moment, rather than
asking people to remember it later.
Obviously, this is more
complicated, but it is possible.
That’s where a method called
Experience Sampling comes in.
This involves pinging people at random
times of the day, with a text, an
app notification, or even a beeper
back in the 1980s, and asking: “How
are you feeling right now? What
are you doing? Who are you with?”
The idea is that, by collecting hundreds
or thousands of these little snapshots,
you can build up a far more realistic
picture of what makes people happy.
And Experience Sampling studies have
found some fascinating patterns.
People tend to report being happiest
when they’re socialising, exercising,
or engaged in activities that give them
a sense of flow, that feeling of being
completely absorbed in what they’re doing.
The situations in which they tend to be
least happy are probably unsurprising:
commuting, working in stressful
conditions, or when they’re ill.
If you are listening to this with a
cold on a crowded commuter train, well,
you’re probably feeling a bit rubbish.
Now, self-reported happiness surveys,
even these ”experience sampling”-style
ones, only take us so far.
Scientists have also looked at
physiological measures: heart
rate variability, levels of the
stress hormone cortisol, and
even patterns of brain activity.
Neuroscientists have found that
certain regions of the brain light
up when people report feeling happy.
When we feel happy, there are clear
physiological changes and measuring
these kinds of changes is the most
accurate way to measure happiness,
theoretically speaking, at least.
But while these methods can be
incredibly precise in a lab, they’re
expensive, invasive, and not exactly
practical for large populations.
In recent years, researchers have tried a
different approach altogether: big data.
By analysing billions of words on social
media, or even the emotional tone of
song lyrics, they attempt to track
collective happiness in real time.
One famous study found that people’s
tweets tended to be more positive in
the morning, dip during the workday,
and then rise again in the evening.
Hardly surprising, perhaps.
Another tracked changes in national mood
based on how cheerful or gloomy song
lyrics became over the course of decades.
Interesting from the point of view
of measuring the happiness of a
wider population over time, but
not particularly helpful when it
comes to more granular measures.
So from smartphones to surveys,
saliva samples to social media,
there are now dozens of different
ways to try to measure happiness.
None of these is perfect, but there has
been enough research into the subject
over the course of several decades
that there are some interesting themes
and trends that researchers have seen
about what makes someone happy, or not.
Some of these will not be
surprising; others might be.
One of the clearest findings is that
money matters, but only up to a point.
When people are struggling to
meet their basic needs, more money
reliably increases happiness.
The difference between living on two
dollars a day and ten dollars is enormous.
But once you reach a certain level
of comfort, the effect flattens out.
Going from an income of €10,000 a year
to €20,000 makes a big difference.
But going from €100,000 to €200,000?
Much less so.
Another theme is the importance
of social connections.
Time and time again, the research shows
that people who feel they can rely on
friends, family, or their community
report higher levels of happiness.
Loneliness, on the other hand, is one of
the strongest predictors of unhappiness.
During the Covid-19 pandemic, when
isolation was forced on much of the world,
surveys found sharp declines in happiness,
especially among younger people.
Spending time with other people,
perhaps unsurprisingly, is positively
correlated with self-reported happiness.
And the worrying thing is that, across
much of the world, people are reporting
spending more and more time alone.
One of the markers of
this is “eating alone”.
According to the 2025 World Happiness
Report, “In 2023, roughly 1 in 4
Americans reported eating all of
their meals alone the previous
day – an increase of 53% since 2003.”
And in the same report, household
size is positively correlated with
happiness, up to a point at least.
According to the report, “In Mexico
and Europe, a household size of four
to five predicts the highest levels
of happiness. Couples who live with
at least one child, or couples who
live with children and members of
their extended family, have especially
high average life satisfaction.”
But the report goes on to acknowledge
that people who live in very large
households do report lower levels of
happiness, but this is probably due to
lower levels of economic satisfaction.
Or to put it another way, it might be
nice to live with lots of people, but
not if you have to queue for 1 hour
for a shower every day and there’s only
one loaf of bread to feed 15 people.
There’s also the role of trust.
Countries where people believe
that others can be trusted, that
institutions are fair, and that
corruption is relatively low, tend
to report higher levels of wellbeing.
It isn’t just about how much
money a country has, but about
how fair and safe life feels.
To give you a personal example, I live in
Sweden, a country that is always towards
the top of these happiness reports.
A few months ago, I was coming back
from a swimming lesson with my son, and
we, or rather I, accidentally left his
favourite Spider-Man rucksack on the tram.
He was very sad, but I went to the lost
and found office the following day, and
found that someone had handed it in.
I had to pay a very small
administration fee, and I got it back.
This made me happy temporarily, and him
very happy when I returned it to him,
but it also made me happy on a deeper,
more permanent level to think that I live
in a place where someone will do that.
Of course, it might not have been
returned, which might have made me
unhappy, so if I had been asked if
I was happy immediately after I’d
been told “sorry, nobody has handed
that in”, this might have clouded my
mood, which highlights a problem with
this self-reporting sampling method.
But it is a real-life, single data point.
And in fact, this year’s Global Happiness
Report made this sensation a core focus.
One of the things they tracked was almost
exactly this: how likely respondents
believed it was that a dropped wallet
would be returned, depending on
whether it was found by a neighbour,
a stranger, or a police officer.
What they found was a definite
trend: the more likely someone
thought someone else was to do them
a good deed, such as returning their
lost wallet, the more likely they
were to say that they were happy.
There were exceptions, of course.
Costa Rica is the sixth-happiest country
in the world, on a self-reported basis,
but comes 128th in terms of trust
in a stranger to return a wallet.
And Iran is the 99th happiest country
in the world, so towards the bottom
of the scale, but Iranians were the
2nd most likely people to say that a
stranger would return their wallet.
There are exceptions, but there
was a strong overall trend.
And interestingly enough, this
report compared the data on expected
wallet return with data on other
acts of “caring” for fellow citizens,
such as donating to charity,
volunteering, or helping a stranger.
There was a general trend whereby
people in countries ranked higher on
these “caregiving” scores reported
having higher levels of happiness.
But the trend was much more defined
for the countries that ranked highest
on the “care receiving” metrics.
To put it another way, yes, caring for
others tends to have a positive effect
on happiness, but the effect isn’t
as great as living in a country where
you expect others to care for you.
Interesting, right?
Now, to wrap things up, there is
unquestionably more to happiness
than believing a stranger is going
to return your wallet, or in my
case, your son’s Spider-Man rucksack.
Happiness is messy, complicated,
and impossible to pin down
with complete precision.
We can try, and we have got
better and better at it.
And we should keep on trying.
After all, to quote one of the original
thinkers on the concept of happiness,
Aristotle, “Happiness is the meaning
and the purpose of life, the whole
aim and end of human existence”.
OK, that is it for today's episode
on the science of happiness.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
I’ll put a link to the Global Happiness
Report in the show notes, if you’d
like to check that out yourself.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.